.Dd August 23, 2021
.Dt ANAGRAM 6
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm anagram
.Nd rearrange letters to form new words
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d|--dictionary Ar pathname
.Op Fl f|--files
.Op Fl l|--length Ar numbers
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -help|-?
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar letters
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility rearranges the given
.Ar letters
to form as many words (anagrams) as possible.
.Pp
Standard input is read if no letters are provided on the command line.
.Pp
The
.Fl l|--length
option can be used to form words of selected size with the letters provided.
.Pp
The
.Fl f|--files
option can help you select a dictionary.
.Ss OPTIONS
.Op Fl d|--dictionary Ar pathname
Use this dictionary pathname if you don't want the default dictionary
.Pp
.Op Fl f|--files
Print possible dictionary files in the DICTPATH
.Pp
.Op Fl l|--length Ar numbers
Specify anagrams lengths if you want intermediate sizes.
.Ar numbers
is a number or a comma separated list of numbers or dash separated number intervals
.Pp
.Op Fl -debug
Enable debug mode
.Pp
.Op Fl -help|-?
Print usage and this help message and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -version
Print version and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl -
Options processing terminator
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The
.Ev ANAGRAM_DEBUG
environment variable can also be set to any value to enable debug mode.
.Pp
The
.Ev DICTPATH
environment variable is the search path for the dictionary files.
It is a colon-separated list of directories in which
.Nm
looks for a
.Pa words
dictionary file.
If not set it will default to /usr/share/dict:/usr/local/share/dict.
Under a Posix system, $HOME/.local/share/dict will also be added to the default,
while %HOMEPATH%/appdata/roaming/python/share/dict:%HOMEPATH%/appdata/local/programs/python/pythonXX/share/dict will be added under a Windows system.
.Pp
The
.Ev ANAGRAM_DICT
environment variable provides a way to avoid specifying an alternate directory on each command line.
.Sh FILES
.Pa /usr/share/dict/words
is the default (English) dictionary on a
.Bx
operating system.
.Pp
Some French dictionaries are also installed as a dependency.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std anagram
.Sh EXAMPLES
To solve a Wordscapes (French) level where the available letters are ABCDEFG, I use a command like:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
$ export ANAGRAM_DICT=/usr/local/share/dict/dict-fr-Wordscapes
$ anagram -l 3-7 abcdefg
.Ed
.Pp
Other dictionaries are also available. For example:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
$ export ANAGRAM_DICT=/usr/local/share/dict/dict-fr-ABU-mots_communs.ascii
$ export ANAGRAM_DICT=/usr/local/share/dict/dict-fr-AU-DELA-common_words.ascii
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr grep 1
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is not a standard UNIX command.
.Pp
This utility tries to follow the PEP 8 style guide for Python code.
.Sh PORTABILITY
Tested OK under Windows.
.Sh HISTORY
This utility was made for the
.Lk https://github.com/HubTou/PNU PNU project
in order to help my wife play
.Lk https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.peoplefun.wordcross Wordscapes
when she was stuck on a level.
.Sh LICENSE
It is available under the 3-clause BSD license.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hubert Tournier
.Sh CAVEATS
An English dictionary should be packaged for operating systems that are not providing one.
.Pp
Searching only for a
.Pa words
link to one of the directories in the
.Ev DICTPATH
is too limitated.
